README.md, before:

# SkillGap AI Coach

A web app that takes a user’s **resume text** and a **job description**, extracts and normalizes skills, computes a **match score**, and suggests **missing skills** plus an **improvement plan**. No API keys required for the baseline; optional LLM mode for richer suggestions.

---

## What it does

- **Input:** Two text areas — paste your resume and the job description.
- **Output:**
  - **Match score** (0–100): percentage of job skills found in your resume.
  - **Overlapping skills:** Skills that appear in both.
  - **Missing skills:** Skills from the job that we didn’t find in your resume.
  - **Suggested next steps:** A short, actionable bullet plan to improve your fit.

The app runs a **deterministic baseline** (keyword/skill dictionary + scoring) by default, so it works with **no external API keys**. You can optionally enable **LLM mode** (via `OPENAI_API_KEY` + `USE_LLM_MODE=true`) for AI-generated improvement suggestions.

---

## Architecture (high level)

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                           User browser                                  │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Next.js (React + TypeScript)  │  Port 3000                       │  │
│  │  - Two text areas: Resume + Job Description                       │  │
│  │  - Submit → POST /analyze → display score, skills, next steps     │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                        │
                                        │ HTTP POST /analyze
                                        ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  FastAPI backend  │  Port 8000                                          │
│  - POST /analyze: resume_text + job_description                         │
│  - Skill extraction (dictionary + normalization)                        │
│  - Match score (job skills found in resume)                             │
│  - Optional: LLM (OpenAI) for suggested_next_steps if key set           │
│  - Returns JSON: match_score, overlapping_skills, missing_skills, steps │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                        │
                                        │ Stored runs in Postgres (history)
                                        ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  Postgres  │  Port 5432                                                 │
│  - Used by Docker Compose; ready for persistence (e.g. analysis history)│
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

- **Frontend:** Next.js (React + TypeScript), single page with form and results.
- **Backend:** Python FastAPI; baseline logic in `services/baseline.py`, optional LLM in `services/llm_service.py`.
- **DB:** Postgres in Docker; app works without DB for MVP (no persistence required for analyze).

---

## Screenshots

![Main page](docs/screenshot-main.png)

![Results](docs/screenshot-results.png)

### Sample inputs for consistent screenshots

Use these exact inputs to get reproducible results for the results screenshot (baseline mode).

**Resume (paste in first text area):**

```
Software Engineer with 4 years of experience. Proficient in Python, React, and PostgreSQL. Built REST APIs with FastAPI and Django. Used Docker for deployment. Strong git workflow and agile practices. Experience with data analysis and SQL.
```

**Job description (paste in second text area):**

```
We are hiring a Backend Engineer. Required: Python, REST APIs, PostgreSQL, Docker, and Kubernetes. Experience with AWS or Terraform preferred. Knowledge of React and microservices a plus. We use agile and CI/CD.
```

**Expected result (baseline):** Match score ~57–67%, overlapping skills (e.g. python, react, postgresql, docker, git, agile, rest, api), missing skills (e.g. kubernetes, aws, terraform), and 4–5 suggested next steps.

---

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- **Docker** and **Docker Compose**
- (Optional) **Node 20+** and **Python 3.12+** for local runs without Docker

### 1. Dockerized local dev (recommended)

From the project root:

```bash
docker compose up
```

This starts:

- **Postgres** on `localhost:5432`
- **Backend** on `http://localhost:8000`
- **Frontend** on `http://localhost:3000`

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000), paste resume and job description, and click **Analyze**.

### 2. Backend only (local Python)

```bash
cd backend
cp .env.example .env   # edit if needed
pip install -r requirements.txt
# Ensure Postgres is running (e.g. via Docker: docker compose up db -d)
uvicorn main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

### 3. Frontend only (local Node)

```bash
cd frontend
cp .env.example .env
npm install
npm run dev
```

Set `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL=http://localhost:8000` in `.env` so the frontend talks to your backend.

### 4. Optional LLM mode

- Set `OPENAI_API_KEY` in the backend environment (e.g. in `.env` or `docker-compose`).
- Set `USE_LLM_MODE=true`.
- Restart the backend; suggested next steps will use OpenAI (fallback to baseline on failure).

---

## API docs

### Base URL

- Local: `http://localhost:8000`
- OpenAPI (Swagger): `http://localhost:8000/docs`

### Endpoints

| Method | Path       | Description                |
|--------|------------|----------------------------|
| GET    | `/health`  | Health check               |
| POST   | `/analyze` | Analyze resume vs job      |
| GET    | `/history` | Last 10 analysis runs     |

### POST /analyze

**Request body (JSON):**

```json
{
  "resume_text": "Your full resume text...",
  "job_description": "Full job description text..."
}
```

**Example response (200):**

```json
{
  "match_score": 67,
  "overlapping_skills": [
    { "skill": "python", "evidence": "Built backend services using Python and FastAPI." },
    { "skill": "react", "evidence": "Developed UIs with React and TypeScript." }
  ],
  "missing_skills": ["kubernetes", "aws"],
  "suggested_next_steps": [
    "Focus on building or highlighting these skills: kubernetes, aws.",
    "Emphasize your experience with: python, react, postgresql in your summary or top bullet points.",
    "Add concrete outcomes (metrics, impact) for your top 3 matching skills.",
    "Tailor your resume header and summary to mirror keywords from the job description."
  ],
  "mode": "baseline"
}
```

- `overlapping_skills` includes a resume snippet (`evidence`) for each skill.
- Every successful analysis is stored in Postgres.
- `mode` is either `"baseline"` or `"llm"` depending on configuration.
- **4xx/5xx:** JSON body with `detail` string (e.g. validation or server error).

### GET /history

Returns the last 10 analysis runs. Each item includes `id`, `timestamp`, `resume_summary`, `job_title_guess`, `match_score`, and full `result` (same shape as POST /analyze response).

---

## Quality

- **Backend:** pytest for scoring and skill extraction (`backend/tests/`). Run: `cd backend && pytest`.
- **Frontend:** ESLint + TypeScript; run: `cd frontend && npm run lint`.
- **Docker:** `docker compose up` runs frontend, backend, and Postgres for local dev.

---

## Roadmap

- [x] **Persistence:** Store analysis runs in Postgres; GET /history returns last 10 runs.
- [x] **Evidence mapping:** Overlapping skills include resume snippets (sentence/context) where each skill was found.
- [ ] **pgvector / embeddings:** Optional skill similarity via embeddings when available; fallback to TF-IDF or current keyword match.
- [ ] **Auth:** Optional login to save and compare multiple resumes/jobs.
- [ ] **Export:** Download report as PDF or markdown.
- [ ] **RAG:** Use job description + resume chunks for retrieval-augmented suggestions when in LLM mode.

---

## Upload to GitHub

Follow these steps to put the project on GitHub.

### 1. Initialize Git

In the project root (e.g. `skillgap-ai-coach`):

```bash
git init
```

### 2. Create a repository on GitHub

1. Go to [github.com](https://github.com) and sign in.
2. Click **New repository** (or **+** → **New repository**).
3. Set **Repository name** to `skillgap-ai-coach` (or your choice).
4. Choose **Public** (or Private).
5. Do **not** check “Add a README” (you already have one).
6. Click **Create repository**.

### 3. Add the remote

GitHub will show a “quick setup” URL. Use it as the remote (replace `YOUR_USERNAME` and `YOUR_REPO` with your values):

```bash
git remote add origin https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/skillgap-ai-coach.git
```

If you prefer SSH:

```bash
git remote add origin git@github.com:YOUR_USERNAME/skillgap-ai-coach.git
```

### 4. Commit and push to main

```bash
git add .
git status
git commit -m "Initial commit: SkillGap AI Coach - resume vs job analysis"
git branch -M main
git push -u origin main
```

### 5. (Optional) Repo description and topics

On the GitHub repo page:

1. Click the **gear** next to “About”.
2. **Description:** e.g. `Resume vs job description analyzer: match score, skills gap, and improvement plan. FastAPI + Next.js.`
3. **Topics:** e.g. `resume`, `job-description`, `skills`, `fastapi`, `nextjs`, `typescript`, `docker`.

Done. Your project is on GitHub.

Commit message:

Improve UI, history behavior, and docs for SkillGap coach

README.md, after:

# SkillGap AI Coach

A web app that takes a user’s **resume text** and a **job description**, extracts and normalizes skills, computes a **match score**, and suggests **missing skills** plus an **improvement plan**. No API keys required for the baseline; optional LLM mode for richer suggestions.

---

## What it does

- **Input:** Two text areas — paste your resume and the job description.
- **Output:**
  - **Match score** (0–100): percentage of job skills found in your resume.
  - **Overlapping skills:** Skills that appear in both.
  - **Missing skills:** Skills from the job that we didn’t find in your resume.
  - **Suggested next steps:** A short, actionable bullet plan to improve your fit.
  - **Recent history:** Your last 10 runs are saved with a sidebar to quickly reload any past analysis.

The app runs a **deterministic baseline** (keyword/skill dictionary + scoring) by default, so it works with **no external API keys**. You can optionally enable **LLM mode** (via `OPENAI_API_KEY` + `USE_LLM_MODE=true`) for AI-generated improvement suggestions.

---

## Architecture (high level)

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                           User browser                                  │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Next.js (React + TypeScript)  │  Port 3000                       │  │
│  │  - Two text areas: Resume + Job Description                       │  │
│  │  - Submit → POST /analyze → display score, skills, next steps     │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                        │
                                        │ HTTP POST /analyze
                                        ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  FastAPI backend  │  Port 8000                                          │
│  - POST /analyze: resume_text + job_description                         │
│  - Skill extraction (dictionary + normalization)                        │
│  - Match score (job skills found in resume)                             │
│  - Optional: LLM (OpenAI) for suggested_next_steps if key set           │
│  - Returns JSON: match_score, overlapping_skills, missing_skills, steps │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                        │
                                        │ Stored runs in Postgres (history)
                                        ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  Postgres  │  Port 5432                                                 │
│  - Used by Docker Compose; ready for persistence (e.g. analysis history)│
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

- **Frontend:** Next.js (React + TypeScript), single page with form and results.
- **Backend:** Python FastAPI; baseline logic in `services/baseline.py`, optional LLM in `services/llm_service.py`.
- **DB:** Postgres in Docker; app works without DB for MVP (no persistence required for analyze).

---

## Screenshots

![Main page](docs/screenshot-main.png)

![Results](docs/screenshot-results.png)

### Sample inputs for consistent screenshots

Use these exact inputs to get reproducible results for the results screenshot (baseline mode).

**Resume (paste in first text area):**

```
Software Engineer with 4 years of experience. Proficient in Python, React, and PostgreSQL. Built REST APIs with FastAPI and Django. Used Docker for deployment. Strong git workflow and agile practices. Experience with data analysis and SQL.
```

**Job description (paste in second text area):**

```
We are hiring a Backend Engineer. Required: Python, REST APIs, PostgreSQL, Docker, and Kubernetes. Experience with AWS or Terraform preferred. Knowledge of React and microservices a plus. We use agile and CI/CD.
```

**Expected result (baseline):** Match score ~57–67%, overlapping skills (e.g. python, react, postgresql, docker, git, agile, rest, api), missing skills (e.g. kubernetes, aws, terraform), and 4–5 suggested next steps.

---

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- **Docker** and **Docker Compose**
- (Optional) **Node 20+** and **Python 3.12+** for local runs without Docker

### 1. Dockerized local dev (recommended)

From the project root:

```bash
docker compose up
```

This starts:

- **Postgres** on `localhost:5432`
- **Backend** on `http://localhost:8000`
- **Frontend** on `http://localhost:3000`

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000), paste resume and job description, and click **Analyze**.

### 2. Backend only (local Python)

```bash
cd backend
cp .env.example .env   # edit if needed
pip install -r requirements.txt
# Ensure Postgres is running (e.g. via Docker: docker compose up db -d)
uvicorn main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

### 3. Frontend only (local Node)

```bash
cd frontend
cp .env.example .env
npm install
npm run dev
```

Set `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL=http://localhost:8000` in `.env` so the frontend talks to your backend.

### 4. Optional LLM mode

- Set `OPENAI_API_KEY` in the backend environment (e.g. in `.env` or `docker-compose`).
- Set `USE_LLM_MODE=true`.
- Restart the backend; suggested next steps will use OpenAI (fallback to baseline on failure).

---

## API docs

### Base URL

- Local: `http://localhost:8000`
- OpenAPI (Swagger): `http://localhost:8000/docs`

### Endpoints

| Method | Path       | Description                |
|--------|------------|----------------------------|
| GET    | `/health`  | Health check               |
| POST   | `/analyze` | Analyze resume vs job      |
| GET    | `/history` | Last 10 analysis runs     |
| DELETE | `/history` | Clear all analysis runs    |
| DELETE | `/history/{id}` | Delete one analysis run |

### POST /analyze

**Request body (JSON):**

```json
{
  "resume_text": "Your full resume text...",
  "job_description": "Full job description text..."
}
```

**Example response (200):**

```json
{
  "match_score": 67,
  "overlapping_skills": [
    { "skill": "python", "evidence": "Built backend services using Python and FastAPI." },
    { "skill": "react", "evidence": "Developed UIs with React and TypeScript." }
  ],
  "missing_skills": ["kubernetes", "aws"],
  "suggested_next_steps": [
    "Focus on building or highlighting these skills: kubernetes, aws.",
    "Emphasize your experience with: python, react, postgresql in your summary or top bullet points.",
    "Add concrete outcomes (metrics, impact) for your top 3 matching skills.",
    "Tailor your resume header and summary to mirror keywords from the job description."
  ],
  "mode": "baseline"
}
```

- `overlapping_skills` includes a resume snippet (`evidence`) for each skill.
- Every successful analysis is stored in Postgres (**except** exact consecutive duplicate runs, which are skipped to avoid cluttering history).
- `mode` is either `"baseline"` or `"llm"` depending on configuration.
- **4xx/5xx:** JSON body with `detail` string (e.g. validation or server error).

### GET /history

Returns the last 10 analysis runs. Each item includes:

- `id`
- `timestamp`
- `resume_summary`
- `job_title_guess`
- `resume_text` (full resume input used for that run)
- `job_description` (full job description input)
- `match_score`
- `result` (same shape as POST /analyze response)

The frontend uses `resume_text` and `job_description` so that clicking a history item **re-populates the inputs and results** for that run.

### DELETE /history

Clears all stored analysis runs.

### DELETE /history/{id}

Deletes a single stored analysis run by id.

---

## Quality

- **Backend:** pytest for scoring and skill extraction (`backend/tests/`). Run: `cd backend && pytest`.
- **Frontend:** ESLint + TypeScript; run: `cd frontend && npm run lint`.
- **Docker:** `docker compose up` runs frontend, backend, and Postgres for local dev.

---

## Roadmap

- [x] **Persistence:** Store analysis runs in Postgres; GET /history returns last 10 runs.
- [x] **Evidence mapping:** Overlapping skills include resume snippets (sentence/context) where each skill was found.
- [ ] **pgvector / embeddings:** Optional skill similarity via embeddings when available; fallback to TF-IDF or current keyword match.
- [ ] **Auth:** Optional login to save and compare multiple resumes/jobs.
- [ ] **Export:** Download report as PDF or markdown.
- [ ] **RAG:** Use job description + resume chunks for retrieval-augmented suggestions when in LLM mode.

---

## Upload to GitHub

Follow these steps to put the project on GitHub.

### 1. Initialize Git

In the project root (e.g. `skillgap-ai-coach`):

```bash
git init
```

### 2. Create a repository on GitHub

1. Go to [github.com](https://github.com) and sign in.
2. Click **New repository** (or **+** → **New repository**).
3. Set **Repository name** to `skillgap-ai-coach` (or your choice).
4. Choose **Public** (or Private).
5. Do **not** check “Add a README” (you already have one).
6. Click **Create repository**.

### 3. Add the remote

GitHub will show a “quick setup” URL. Use it as the remote (replace `YOUR_USERNAME` and `YOUR_REPO` with your values):

```bash
git remote add origin https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/skillgap-ai-coach.git
```

If you prefer SSH:

```bash
git remote add origin git@github.com:YOUR_USERNAME/skillgap-ai-coach.git
```

### 4. Commit and push to main

```bash
git add .
git status
git commit -m "Initial commit: SkillGap AI Coach - resume vs job analysis"
git branch -M main
git push -u origin main
```

### 5. (Optional) Repo description and topics

On the GitHub repo page:

1. Click the **gear** next to “About”.
2. **Description:** e.g. `Resume vs job description analyzer: match score, skills gap, and improvement plan. FastAPI + Next.js.`
3. **Topics:** e.g. `resume`, `job-description`, `skills`, `fastapi`, `nextjs`, `typescript`, `docker`.

Done. Your project is on GitHub.
